Organizational Placement:       Schedule #: 2006-0016
Agency: Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision

Program Description:
The three-member Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision is appointed by the governor and
confirmed by the Senate to four-year terms. Under the authority of ORS 137 and ORS 144, the board
works in partnership with the Department of Corrections and local supervisory authorities to protect the
public and reduce the risk of repeat criminal behavior through incarceration and community supervision
decisions.

The board imposes prison terms and makes parole decisions on offenders whose criminal conduct
occurred prior to November 1, 1989; who have been sentenced as dangerous offenders; or sentenced for
aggravated murder and are eligible for parole. Parole is a period of supervision in the community
following release from prison. Offenders on parole are released from prison by the board before their
sentences are completed, and serve the remainder of the sentence under community supervision.

Post-prison supervision is a sentence of correctional supervision in the community following a prison or
jail sentence, and has been in use since 1989. For most crimes committed since November 1, 1989, the
sentencing court and the Department of Corrections establish the length of prison terms using sentencing
guidelines. Offenders sentenced under these guidelines are discharged from post-prison supervision
automatically upon expiration of the statutory period of supervision. The board determines conditions
that must be met by the offender following a sentence of 12 months or more in a state institution. Local
jurisdictions determine conditions that must be met by the offender following a sentence of less than 12
months in a local correctional facility.

Other functions performed by board staff include issuing arrest warrants for absconders, and imposing
sanctions on violators of conditions of community supervision. They also notify eligible victims of
hearings and releases, and respond to requests for information about individual inmates and parole and
post-prison supervision in general.  The Department of Corrections provides support functions such as
accounting, facilities management, information systems, payroll, and purchasing for the board.

Program Records:
001 State Board of Parole and Post-Prison Sup ervision Records, 1988 - [ongoing], 2.00 c.f.
 (a)  Retain board meeting minutes  and member biographies permanently, transfer to State Archives
    after 10 years
 (b) Retain board formation and organizational reco rds permanently, transfer to State Archives after
  10 years
 (c)  Retain Board Reports and Studies permanentl y, transfer to State Archives after 10 years
 (d)  Retain audiotapes 1 year  following transcription, destroy
002 Statistical Reports
 (a)  Retain monthly and spec ial reports 15 years, destroy
 (b)  Retain all other records 2 years, destroy
003 Inmate Parole and Post-Prison Supervision Case Files (Includes all records relating to the
 case: e.g. appeals, warrants, letters, hearin gs files, revocations, board rulings, etc.)
 Retain 25 years after discharge, destroy
004 Hearing Schedules
 Retain 2 years, destroy
005 Hearing Tape Recordings
 Retain 4 years, destroy, or reuse tapes

State Agency General Records Retention Schedule Records:
Includes but is not limited to
Administrative Records - OAR 166-300-0015
Administrative Rule Preparation Records
Agency Organizational Records
Attorney General Opinions
Business Plan Records
Calendar and Scheduling Records
Contracts and Agreements
Correspondence
LEDS Certification Records
Legislative Tracking Records
Litigation Records
Mailing Lists
Policy and Procedure Guidelines and Manuals
Policy Development and Planning Records
Postal Records
Security Records
Staff Meeting Records
Personnel Records – OAR 166-300-0040
Employee Personnel Records
Employee Training Records
Position Description and Reclassification Records
Recruitment and Selection Records

Databases:
PAROLE BOARD MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
