Film and Video Office
Records Retention Schedule
Effective Date: March, 1997

Organizational Placement      Schedule number:  96-0057
Agency:   Oregon Film and Video Office

Program Description:
The mission of the semi-independent Oregon Film and Video Office is to serve as a liaison
between production companies and Oregon businesses, citizens and government.  It also markets
film locations within Oregon, and promotes the state’s expanding film and television workforce
and companies in the emerging area of multimedia both at home and throughout the world.  In
addition it provides consumer protection.  The Oregon Film and Video Office fosters
partnerships between film and video, high technology, telecommunications and software that
will allow the state to attract businesses developing and using the new and emerging
technologies that will create jobs in Oregon.  The five member Film and Video Board is
appointed by the Governor to set policy and provide general oversight of the Office.  Office staff
respond to information requests and job inquiries.  The Office serves as a consumer protection
clearinghouse to protect Oregonians against unscrupulous business practices.  It maintains
computerized databases which track project activities, and provide reference information about
potential clients.  A photograph database us used to market film locations.  The Office also
monitors the development of film policies by government agencies and helps agencies develop
realistic regulations that protect the environment and consumer safety while promoting filming in
their jurisdictions.  Agency revenue includes lottery funds and fees.

Records Description:
Film and Video Board Meeting Records document the activities and decisions of the Board
which sets policy and provides general oversight of the Oregon Film and Video Office.  Film
Location Request Tracking Records document consumer protection activities, and are used to log
and track requests from production companies requesting filming location information.  They are
also used to spot trends.  Film Project Management Files are used to track the activities and
progress of filming projects in Oregon.  Film Site Photograph Files are in the Photofile Database
and contain photographs of potential film sites and related narrative descriptive information.  The
files are used as a marketing tool to provide information to film companies about potential film
locations in Oregon.  Publications are used for marketing, publicity and promotion.  They
include agency calendars and a newsletter which is used to inform industry professionals of
Office activities and industry resources, and doubles as a marketing tool by highlighting film
locations.

Administrative, facilities, financial, information management, payroll, personnel, purchasing,
and risk management records may be found in the State Agency General Schedule.

Program Records:
0001  Film and Video Board Meeting Records, 1990-[ongoing]
 Retain permanently, transfer to  State Archives after 10 years.
0002  Film Location Request Tracking Records
 Retain current and last biennium, destroy.
0003  Film Project Management Files
 (a)Feature film and television series  records:  Retain 10 years, destroy.
 (b)Other records:  Retain 2 years , destroy.
0004  Film Site Photograph Files
 Retain until site not useful, destroy.
0005  Publications
 (a)Final publication:  Retain cu rrent and last biennium, destroy.
 (b)Preparation records:  Retain until final document published, destroy.
