Organizational Placement Schedule Number: 2010-0006
Agency:    Geology and Mineral Industries
Division:   Administration
Program: Director/State Geologist’s Office

Program Description
The Director of the Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI) holds the
position of State Geologist (ORS 516.120-516.130) and is responsible for implementing the
policies of the Geology and Mineral Industries Governing Board (ORS 516.080-516.090).  The
Director oversees the administrative responsibilities for the Board and directs the technical and
administrative operation of DOGAMI, in accordance with the Board’s direction.  The Governing
Board, composed of five citizens appointed by the Governor and confirmed by the Senate for
four year terms, is responsible for appointing the State Geologist/Director.  Administrative duties
of the Director include making recommendations to the Governing Board and Legislative
Assembly; acting as the Department’s liaison with the Governor and Legislative Assembly;
tracking and monitoring legislation; approving agency policies and plans; and acting as the
Department’s liaison with local, state, and federal agencies.  In case of emergency, the Director
is the principal technical geological contact for emergency response through the state’s
Emergency Management Division, Oregon Military Department.  The Director is also an ex-
officio member of the State Board of Geologist Examiners, which determines professional
geologist qualifications, conducts examinations, and certifies geologists within the state.  The
Director oversees DOGAMI representation on the State Historical Markers Program Committee,
Travel and Information Council, which makes recommendations for placement of historical
markers within the state; and oversees DOGAMI’s Geologic Mapping Advisory Committee,
which sets priorities for geologic mapping projects within the state.  In addition to participation
on a variety of state and federal committees and task forces, the Director is a member of the
Association of American State Geologists, which represents state geological surveys in the U.S.

Program Records
001  External Committee Records
 Retain 5 years, destroy
002  Director’s Correspondence, 1993-[ongoing], 1 c.f.
(a) Retain substantive policy related records permanently, transfer to State Archives after
10 years
(b) Retain all other records 5 years, destroy

State Agency General Records Retention Schedule Records
Administrative Records (OAR 166-300-0015)
Administrative Rule Preparation Records
Attorney General Opinions
Calendar and Scheduling Records
Contracts and Agreements
Correspondence
Legislative Tracking Records
Lobbyist Records
Mailing Lists

Databases
None

Organizational Placement Schedule Number: 2010-0006
Agency:    Geology and Mineral Industries
Program:  Program 1 (Geologic Survey)

Program Description
Program 1 (Geologic Survey) performs the following functions: geologic mapping, natural
hazard mitigation, database management, economic geology, and publications.

The program’s databases provide data on over 8,500 mines, prospects, and mineral occurrences
within the state based on source data from the U.S. Geological Survey, Bureau of Land
Management, and the U.S. Forest Service, in addition to DOGAMI’s Mined Lands Reclamation
Program.  Data includes commodity name, location, ownership, published references, production
data, if available, and cross references to other state and federal agencies.

Program 1 is responsible for the assessment, interpretation, and evaluation of mineral resources
within the state, primarily for the purposes of economic development, land use planning, and
policy development.  It collects field data, conducts studies of mineral resources, and publishes
the results.  In addition, it provides technical advice and assistance to state and local government
agencies, which may include narrative or statistical reports

Geologic mapping projects, which also encompass geologic hazard characterization and
mitigation comprise field work, collection of geologic samples, and the publication of project
results.  In addition, Program 1 fulfills an outreach function for the Department by responding to
inquiries and providing advice and research assistance to the public, private businesses, and state
and local agencies; presenting lectures and presentations to interested groups; and selling
DOGAMI and other natural resource publications through the Nature of the Northwest
Information Center.

The program provides geologic hazard maps and information about potential landslide, flood,
earthquake and tsunami activity in Oregon.  It interprets and analyzes information from
geologists’ field notes, seismic and geophysical data, published research, and seismic site
evaluations.  The program also provides leadership and technical assistance for earthquake and
tsunami scenarios, natural hazards workshops, earthquake response training and planning, and
policy centered natural hazard mitigation for state and local agencies.

The program represents DOGAMI on the Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission,
which provides advice about plans and proposals addressing seismic hazards to the Governor and
Legislative Assembly and the Western States Seismic Policy Council, jointly coordinated with
the U.S. Geological Survey and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which
provides networking opportunities for state energy managers and geologic survey
representatives.

Program 1 collects, processes, utilizes, and distributes lidar data (light detection and ranging) that
can provide very precise, accurate, and high-resolution images of the surface of the earth,
vegetation, and the built environment. Lidar data and imagery helps identify geologic hazards,
manage forests, farmlands, fish, streams and fires, and help with urban engineering and planning

applications.  The program uses Lidar to build new-generation topographic maps as a base for
geologic maps and for natural hazard assessment.  This activity represents a major focus of
Program 1 staff. Lidar data and visualization materials contain vital information for all natural
resource and land management organizations.

The program is responsible for providing geological planning advice to state, local, and federal
agencies for a variety of purposes.  Planning efforts for local governments involve technical
assistance in land use planning, and periodic review and plan amendments through membership
on the Periodic Review Assistance Team, coordinated by the Oregon Office of Emergency
Management, and Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD). Other agency
partners include the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), and the Oregon
Department of Energy. Program staff also assist in the formulation of public planning policy,
particularly in the areas of mineral potential and geologic hazards.  Other activities include
planning assistance for state water quality and quantity; energy facility siting, providing site
reviews for power plants, dams, and other critical or essential facilities, emphasizing geologic
hazard issues; and off-shore coordination policy development through participation in the Ocean
Policy Advisory Council (coordinated by DLCD) and other working groups.  The program links
Department geologic mapping and databases to planning efforts in addition to providing referrals
and publications.  It participates in legislatively mandated interagency activities involving water
resources, offshore resources, hazardous materials, and nuclear wastes.  The program also
maintains DOGAMI’s State Agency Coordination Report, required by DLCD (per ORS
197.180) for state-wide coordination of land use plans and programs.

The program supports the agency’s mission to publish timely geologic information, by
publishing periodicals and other publications, including, but not limited to several series of
professional maps and papers, Oregon Geology, Cascadia, and online interactive maps.  The
publications reach a wide spectrum of readers interested in the geology, geologic hazards, and
the mineral industry of Oregon and provide information on both technical and general interest
subjects.

Program Records
003  Program 1 Project Records, 1979-[ongoing], 1 c.f.
 (a) Retain final reports permanently, transfer to State Archives after 10 years
 (b) Retain all other records 10 years after project completed, destroy
004  Geologic Mapping Advisory Committee Records
 Retain 10 years, destroy
005 Geologic Source Records
 Retain until entered on database and verified, destroy
006  Geologist and Field Project Records
 Retain 5 years after project ends, destroy
007  Mine and Mineral Commodity Records, 1937-[ongoing]
 Retain permanently, transfer to State Archives after 10 years
009  State Agency Coordination Reports
 Retain current and prior two reports, destroy

010  Federal Agency Project Records
 Retain 5 years, destroy
011  Comprehensive and Periodic Plan Review Records
 Retain 2 years, destroy
012  Site-Specific Project Review Records
 Retain 5 years, destroy
013  DOGAMI Publications and Maps, ca. 1880-[ongoing], 15 c.f.
 Retain one copy permanently, transfer to State Archives after 99 years
014  Oregon Bureau of Mines and Geology Publications, 1911-1923, 2 c.f.
 Retain permanently, transfer to State Archives after 99 years
015  Photographs, Negatives, and Slides, 1937-[ongoing], 5 c.f. u
 (a) Retain significant records permanently, transfer to State Archives after 20 years
 (b) Retain all other records 2 years, destroy
016  DOGAMI Unpublished Papers, ca. 1937-[ongoing], 1 c.f.
 Retain permanently, transfer to State Archives after 99 years
017 Field Note Books
 Retain 10 years, destroy
018  Department Mining Records, 1927-1968, 6 c.f.
 Retain permanently, transfer to State Archives after 99 years
019  Exploratory Drilling Research Records, 1975-[ongoing], 2 c.f.
 Retain permanently, transfer to State Archives after 99 years
020  Assay Records, 1911-1982, 2 c.f.
 Retain permanently, transfer to State Archives after 99 years

State Agency General Records Retention Schedule Records
Administrative Records (OAR 166-300-0015)
Calendar and Scheduling Records
Correspondence
Publication Preparation Records

Databases
CHANNEL MIGRATION
COASTAL EROSION
EARTHQUAKE HAZARD
FLOOD HAZARD
GEOCHRONOLOGIC
GILO (GEOCHEMICAL)
GTILO (GEOTHERMAL)
LIDAR
LIDAR DATA QUADRANGLES
MILO (MINERAL)
OGDC (OREGON GEOLOGIC DIGITAL COMPILATION)
SLIDO (LANDSLIDE)
TSUNAMI HAZARD
VOLCANIC

Organizational Placement Schedule Number: 2010-0006
Agency:   Geology and Mineral Industries
Program: Program 1 (Geologic Survey)
Section:   Business Office

Program Description
The Business Office provides support for administrative, personnel, and fiscal services of the
Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI).  Support services include budget
development and tracking, accounts receivable, accounts payable, financial statements and
reports, receipts, payroll, personnel, and contracting and procurement.  It is responsible for
managing contracts from federal and other funds, technical and financial reporting, close-out,
and audits. Financial data is entered onto the state’s Executive Accounting System (EAS) (and
subsequently the State Financial Management System [SFMS]), managed by the State
Controller’s Division, Department of Administrative Services, for accounting purposes.  The
office also tracks revenue from publication sales, permits, bonds, and from federal and other
fund grants and projects, and tracks inventory and sales for the Nature of the Northwest
Information Center (see separate description for Nature of the Northwest).

Program Records
None

State Agency General Records Retention Schedule Records
Administrative Records (OAR 166-300-0015)
Calendar and Scheduling Records
Contracts and Agreements
Correspondence
Financial Records (OAR 166-300-0025)
Accounts Payable Reports
Accounts Receivable Reports
Budget Preparation Records
Grant Records
Purchasing Records
Payroll Records (OAR 166-300-0035)
Employee Payroll Records
Personnel Records (OAR 166-300-0040)
Employee Personnel Records
Employee Training Records
Employment Eligibility Verification Forms (I-9)
Recruitment and Selection Records

Databases
None

Organizational Placement   Schedule Number: 2010-0006
Agency:   Geology and Mineral Industries
Program: Program 2 (Mineral Land Reclamation and Regulation (MLRR))

Program Description:
The Mineral Land Reclamation and Regulation program (MLRR), administered in DOGAMI’s
Albany field office, is responsible for the regulation of surface mined land reclamation (ORS
517), providing for safe and environmentally sound surface mining, leading to subsequent
beneficial second use for forestry, agriculture, and other long-term uses.  The program issues
mining reclamation permits for mineral exploration activity, mineral and aggregate mining, coal
and metal bearing ores mining, and chemical process mining in cooperation with local
governments who are responsible for issuing mine operation (land use) permits.  The program
coordinates the permitting authorities of all state agencies, each of which retains full autonomy
and responsibility for its mine related regulatory authority.  In addition, the program is
responsible for interagency environmental and reclamation analysis at proposed new mining
sites; enforcement at current mining operations; and reclamation on illegally abandoned mine
sites.  The program also presents awards to recognize reclamation and mine operations that
exceed law requirements.

The MLRR program is responsible for regulating the drilling of wells for energy sources such as
natural gas, petroleum (ORS 520), and geothermal energy (ORS 522) for the purpose of health
and safety, resource conservation, respect of ownership interests, and protection of the
environment.  The program issues permits for oil and gas well drilling, geothermal well drilling,
and seismic shot hole drilling (for placing and detonating explosives).  Staff conduct multiple
inspections of well sites before, during, and after drilling; coordinate with federal, state and local
agencies to address environmental and land-use concerns; and maintain records and samples
from wells (which are stored on a confidential basis for a period of years, then made available for
access by the public).

Program Records
021  Oil, Gas, Geothermal Well, and Seismic Shot Hole Permit Records, 1930-[ongoing],
   1 c.f.
(a) Retain well summary, surveyor’s plat, well history, application to drill (permit) and
other applications, core records, lithologic description, plugging records, flow tests,
injection withdrawal reports, and reservoir pressure reports permanently, transfer to State
Archives when file is closed
(b) Retain all other records 25 years after file is closed, destroy
022  Gas Storage Project Records
 Retain 10 years after project ends, destroy
023  Water Disposal Records
 Retain 5 years, destroy
024  Gas Production Records
 (a) Retain reports 10 years, destroy
 (b) Retain all other records 5 years, destroy
025  Program 2 Status Reports
 Retain 6 years, destroy

026 Well Logs, 1930-[ongoing], 10 c.f.
 Retain permanently, transfer to State Archives when file is closed
027  Mining Permits and Exemption Certificates Records
 (a) Retain reclamation plan and site plan maps 1 year after superseded by approved plan
  and maps, destroy
 (b) Retain financial security documents 6 years after released or file closed, destroy
 (c) Retain all other records 30 years after file closed, destroy
028  Total Exemption Permit Records
 Retain 1 year after file closed, destroy
029 Stormwater Permit Records
 Retain current and previous permit, destroy

State Agency General Records Retention Schedule Records
Administrative Records (OAR 166-300-0015)
Calendar and Scheduling Records
Correspondence
Publication Preparation Records

Databases
DEQ STORMWATER
GEOTHERMAL
OIL AND GAS
MINING
