Oregon State Archives
Records Retention Schedule
Edition: August 2024                                   Schedule Number: 2024-0006
1

Agency:   Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) / Oregon Health
Authority (OHA)
Division:  Shared Services
Program:  Background Check Unit (BCU)

Program Description
The Background Check Unit is responsible for conducting criminal records checks
and abuse checks pursuant to ORS 181A.195, 181A.200, 181A.215 443.004 and
443.006; and abuse checks pursuant to ORS 409.025, 409.027, 413.036, 443.004,
443.007 and 443.008. The BCU’s administrative authority is promulgated in OAR 407
Division 7, and OAR 943 Division 007. ODHS created the Unit in 2001 as the Criminal
Records Unit (CRU) to provide consistent, centralized criminal records checks using
technical expertise and the latest resources. The Unit continued providing services to
OHA when it split from ODHS in 2004. With the addition of statutory abuse check
responsibilities in 2007, the Unit changed its name to the Background Check Unit
(BCU); the change became effective April 1, 2009.  Beginning January 2016, the
Oregon State Police authorized BCU to conduct criminal records checks for the
“Clearinghouse” under ORS 181A.190, 181A.215, and 181A.235 for businesses not
regulated by any state agency.

Individuals subject to a criminal records check, abuse check, or both, include ODHS
employees, volunteers, and contractors; OHA employees, volunteers, and
contractors; employees, volunteers, and contractors of ODHS or OHA-regulated
agencies providing services to vulnerable individuals such as children, individuals
with disabilities (including developmental disabilities, physical disabilities, and mental
health disorders), and elderly individuals. Subject individuals (SIs) also include adult
and child foster providers, adoptive parents, adult household members in homes
where care is provided, and individuals who provide in-home care or other types of
support services for vulnerable individuals. The BCU reviews criminal offender and
abuse investigation information to make fitness determinations. The BCU also reviews
compliance with state and federal criminal records check and abuse check
requirements.

Due to the federal Adam Walsh Act of 2006 and subsequent federal requirements for
certain individuals, BCU receives requests for an Oregon child protective services
check from qualified agencies in other U.S.A. states. A response to such a request is
“yes” or “no” regarding the existence of Oregon records with no other access (such
access is through a different ODHS office). BCU offers similar child protective services
checks for Oregon programs under the Prison Rape Reduction Act and for Oregon
Court Appointed Special Advocate (CASA) programs.

Under the Clearinghouse, BCU offers criminal records checks to businesses and
organizations not regulated by any state agencies which serve vulnerable individuals.

Oregon State Archives
Records Retention Schedule
Edition: August 2024                                   Schedule Number: 2024-0006
2

These businesses and organizations may request a fingerprint-based Oregon and
national criminal records check for employees and volunteers. The BCU reviews the
results of the state and national fingerprint-based check to make fitness
determinations. Fitness determinations for non-regulatory criminal records check do
not include access of abuse information.

BCU conducts criminal records checks and gathers information upon request from a
variety of sources, including but not limited to the Law Enforcement Data System
(LEDS), the Oregon Judicial Case Information Network’s online court system
(eCourts), the Oregon Youth Authority’s Juvenile Justice Information System (JJIS),
the Oregon Department of Transportation Driver and Motor Vehicle Services Division
(DMV), and local courts. In addition, the BCU uses the resources of the Oregon State
Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct state and notional
fingerprint-based criminal records checks.

Abuse checks are conducted using investigation reports available from other DHS
and OHA sources. When required by federal directive, such as the Adam Walsh Act,
BCU requests child protective services information on subject individuals from state
agencies outside Oregon.

BCU conducts a weighing test to make a fitness determination upon discovery of any
potentially disqualifying criminal or abuse information involving a subject individual.
If the subject individual has potentially disqualifying convictions or conditions, several
factors are considered, including but not limited to the nature of the crime or abuse
and date committed; accuracy of the findings; current status of the applicant; and
legal and policy guidelines regarding their authorization to hold the position, provide
services, or be employed, licensed, certified or registered. Subject individuals
receiving fitness determination outcomes of “denied” or “restricted approval” may
appeal the decision.

Program Records
001 Provider Records
Retain 5 years after case closure, destroy
002  Subject Individual Records
(a) Retain contested Subject Individual Records 6 years after last action or
employee separation, whichever is longer, destroy
(b) Retain uncontested Subject Individual Records 3 years after last action or
employee separation, whichever is longer, destroy
(c) Retain fingerprint cards until final report/finding issued or upon return by
the Oregon State Police or Federal Bureau of Investigation, destroy

State Agency General Records Retention Schedule Records
Includes but is not limited to:

Oregon State Archives
Records Retention Schedule
Edition: August 2024                                   Schedule Number: 2024-0006
3

Administrative Records (OAR 166-300-0015)
Administrative Rule Preparation Records
Calendar and Scheduling Records
Communication Logs
Conference, Seminar, and Training Program Records
Correspondence
Key Assignment Records
Legislative Tracking Records
Policy and Procedure Guidelines and Manuals
Publication Preparation Records
Visitor Logs
Financial Records (OAR 166-300-0025)
Budget Preparation Records
Internal Audit Reports
Personnel Records (OAR 166-300-0040)
Employee Personnel Records

Systems of Record
CJIS Certification
CRIMS—Legacy data only as of 10/2023
ORCHARDS (Includes ORCHARDS Production; ORCHARDS CW; and two testing
platforms, ORCHARDS UAT and ORCHARDS CW UAT)
